# Equivalence Relations

## Equivalence Relation: Definition

**Definition:** Let $A$ be a set.  A relation $R$ on $A$ is called an *equivalence relation* if it is
reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.

## Examples

Let $A=\{-2,-1,1,2,3,4\}$.  

- The relation $=$ is an equivalence relation.

- The relation "has the same parity as" is an equivalence relation.

- The relation "has the same sign as" is an equivalence relation.

- The relation "has the same sign and parity" is an equivalence relation.

##

Let $X$ be the set of books in Babbidge Library with one author. Here are some equivalence relations:

- Has the same author.

- Has the same number of pages.

- Are located on the same floor of the library.

## Equivalence Classes

**Definition:** Let $A$ be a set and $R$ a relation on $A$.  For any $a\in A$, the *equivalence class*
of $a$ under $R$, written $[a]$ or $[a]_R$, is the set
$$
[a] =\{b\in A : bRa\}.
$$

If $A=\{-2,-1,1,2,3,4\}$ and $R$ is the relation "has the same parity as" then:

- $[-2]$ is the set $\{-2,2,4\}$
- $[2]$ is the same set $\{-2,2,4\}$
- $[1]$ is the set $\{-1,1,3\}$
- $[3]$ is the set $\{-1,1,3\}$

## Equivalence Classes  - Examples

If $X$ is the set of books in Babbidge Library with one author, and $R$ is the relation "has the same author"
then

- [Ray Bradbury] is the set of books in Babbidge Library with only one author, and that author is Ray Bradbury.

If $R$ is the relation "has the same number of pages", then

- [War and Peace] is the set of books in Babbidge Library (with one author) that have the same number of pages as War and Peace.

Question: why do I insist on books with one author?

## Example 11.12 - polynomials

Let $P$ be the set of polynomials with real coefficients.   Define a relation $R$ on $P$ by saying that
$fRg$ if $f$ and $g$ have the same degree.  Then $R$ is an equivalence relation.  

The equivalence class $[x]$ of the polynomial $x$ consists of all polynomials of degree one. 

More generally there is one equivalence class for each degree, and the equivalence class consists of
all polynomials of that degree.

## Example 11.13 - Congruence

We have seen that $\equiv\pmod{n}$ is an equivalence relation on $\mathbb{Z}$.  

What are the equivalence classes $[x]$ for $x\in\mathbb{Z}$?


## Rational numbers

Let $M$ be the set of pairs $(m,n)$ where $m$ and $n$ are integers and $n\not=0$.  Define
a relation $(m,n)R(m',n')$ if $mn'-m'n=0$.  What are the equivalence classes?

















## Related Video

{{< video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ycUcelxAnn4 >}}
