\renewcommand{\subset}{\subseteq}

## Composition of functions

Suppose that $f:A\to B$ and $g:B\to C$ are functions.  The *composition* of $f$ and $g$ is a new function
$g\circ f:A\to C$ defined by $(g\circ f)(x)=g(f(x))$.  

## Composition cont'd

In terms of ordered pairs, if $f\subset A\times B$ and $g\subset B\times C$ are functions,
then $g\circ f$ is the set of ordered pairs $(a,c)\in A\times C$ such that there exists $b\in B$
with $(a,b)\in f$ and $(b,c)\in g$.


## Variations



- Suppose $f:A\to B$ and $g:C\to D$ are functions and $B\subset C$.  Then we can still define $g\circ f$ by
the same formula $(g\circ f)(x) = g(f(x))$.

- Suppose $f:A\to B$ and $g:C\to D$ are functions and the range of $f$ is a subset of $C$.  Then we
can still define $(g\circ f)$ by the same formula.

## A warning

Warning: $g\circ f$ means *first $f$, then $g$*, NOT *first $g$, then $f$*, which is what our normal
left-to-right instincts (at least in English) might suggest.

## Examples

**Problem 12.4.1:**
Suppose $A=\{5,6,8\}$, $B=\{0,1\}$, and $C=\{1,2,3\}$.  Let $f=\{(5,1),(6,0),(8,1)\}\subset A\times B$ and
let $g=\{(0,1),(1,1)\}\subset B\times C$.  Find $g\circ f$.


## Examples continued

**Problem 12.4.3:** Let $A=\{1,2,3\}$, let $f\subset A\times A$ be the function $f=\{(1,2),(2,2),(3,1)\}$
and let $g:A\to A$ be the function $g=\{(1,3),(2,1),(3,2)\}$.  Find $g\circ f$ and $f\circ g$.


## Examples continued

**Problem 12.4.9:** Let $f:\mathbb{Z}\to\mathbb{Z}\to\mathbb{Z}$ be the function defined
by $f(m,n)=m+n$ and $g:\mathbb{Z}\to\mathbb{Z}\times\mathbb{Z}$ be the function $g(m)=(m,m)$.
Find the formulae for $g\circ f$ and $f\circ g$.

##

**Proposition:** Suppose that $f:A\to B$, $g:B\to C$ and $h:C\to D$ are functions.  Then
$(h\circ g)\circ f = h\circ(g\circ f)$.  In other words, composition of functions is associative.


##

**Theorem:** Suppose $f:A\to B$ and $g:B\to C$ are functions.  

- If $f$ and $g$ are injective, then $g\circ f$ is injective.
- If $f$ and $g$ are surjective, then $g\circ f$ is surjective.









## Related Video

{{< video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=02z6pEgUh6w >}}
